EIP-3372 - Apply minor modifications to the Ethash algorithm to break current ASIC implementations (EIP-969 resubmission) (#3372)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-3369.md

---

> eip: 3369

Author: Any certain reason for thing being EIP-3372 instead of EIP-3369 (except the pull request name)?

There were a couple highly-upvoted reddit posts that called it an EIP-3369. Also, 3369 has the same two numbers in the end as EIP-969 does, which looks pretty nice.

> eip: 3369

Reviewer: EIP numbers are assigned by editors.  We have a system in place for numbering them and it should be considered arbitrary to users.  We definitely do not support people picking their own numbers, squatting on numbers, or manipulating the number selection system to choose particular values.  Think of it like an auto-generated number in a database... you get what you get.

created: 2021-03-13
---

# Simple Summary

This EIP proposes minor modifications to the current Ethash PoW algorithm to kick ASICs out of the network.

# Abstract

This EIP is to kick current ASIC implementations out of the network to keep the Ethereum network secure and healthy.

# Motivation

ASICs provide a severe centralization risk for the Ethereum network. If we do not get rid of them, small GPU miners will be forced to exit the Ethereum mining because EIP-1559 will make them mining at a loss. Furthermore, ASIC production will be concentrated only at one or two parties, which will make the Ethereum hashrate centralized. Also, it is worth noting that Ethash ASIC machines cost 10k+ USD, while GPUs are priced less than 1000 USD.

With GPUs, miners can switch to other mining algorithms, but with ASICs, it is impossible. Leaving everything as-is will almost certainly a very tough (from the side of miners) integration of the Ethereum 2.0.

In short, this EIP is required to keep the Ethereum network stable and decentralized by keeping the ASIC business away.

# Specification

If `block.number >= ETHASH11_BLKNUM`, activate the `ethash1.1` algorithm version.

## ethash1.1

> The changes done are minor yet effective to break ASIC implementations.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Specification section should *only* contain technical details, no extraneous motivation related information.

> Right now, `fnv` hash function is used throughout the `hashimoto` function. `fnv` is identical for all steps, `ethash1.1` will introduce additional `fnvA`, `fnvB`, `fnvC`, `fnvD`, and `fnvE` functions. All those functions will have different FNV constants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prior to this change, `fnv` hash function is used throughout the `hashimoto` function. `fnv` is identical for all steps, `ethash1.1` will introduce additional `fnvA`, `fnvB`, `fnvC`, `fnvD`, and `fnvE` functions. All those functions will have different FNV constants.
```

```c
// Previously used FNV prime
#define FNV_PRIME_0 0x1000193

// New FNV primes
#define FNV_PRIME_A 0x10001a7
#define FNV_PRIME_B 0x10001ab
#define FNV_PRIME_C 0x10001cf
#define FNV_PRIME_D 0x10001e3
#define FNV_PRIME_E 0x10001f9
```

> The FNV prime selection is based on David Stanfill's work on EIP-969.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Attribution is not required, and not appropriate for the specification section.  Also, 969 is a DRAFT EIP which means referencing it here will block moving this EIP forward until that EIP is moved forward.  Recommend removing this line.

> Right now, all parts of Ethash are using the `fnv` (hereinafter referenced as `fnv0`) function. This EIP proposes a change in this area. `fnvA` replaces fnv in the DAG item selection step; `fnvB` replaces `fnv0` in the DAG item mix step; `fnvC(fnvD(fnvE` replaces `fnv0(fnv0(fnv0(` in the compress mix step. `fnv0` in the DAG generation step should remain unchanged to keep previous DAGs valid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prior to this EIP, all parts of Ethash are using the `fnv` (hereinafter referenced as `fnv0`) function.  As of the introduction of this EIP:
* `fnvA` replaces `fnv0` in the DAG item selection step
* `fnvB` replaces `fnv0` in the DAG item mix step
* `fnvC(fnvD(fnvE` replaces `fnv0(fnv0(fnv0(` in the compress mix step
* `fnv0` in the DAG generation step should remain unchanged to keep previous DAGs valid.
```

# Backwards compatibility

> This EIP is not backward-compatible. Ethereum users and Mining Pools will be required to upgrade their software to support `ethash1.1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mining hardware that is optimized for ethash may no longer work if the `fnv` constants are baked into the hardware and cannot be changed.
```

All consensus changes are assumed to require a hard fork so mention of that is not required in this section.

    return a*0x10001ab ^ b
}

func fnvC(a, b uint32) uint32 {
    return a*0x10001cf ^ b
}

func fnvD(a, b uint32) uint32 {
    return a*0x10001e3 ^ b
}

func fnvE(a, b uint32) uint32 {
    return a*0x10001f9 ^ b
}

// fnvHash mixes in data into mix using the ethash fnv method.
func fnvHash(mix []uint32, data []uint32, fnvFunc func(a, b uint32) uint32) {
    for i := 0; i < len(mix); i++ {
        mix[i] = fnvFunc(mix[i], data[i])
    }
}

// generateDatasetItem combines data from 256 pseudorandomly selected cache nodes,
// and hashes that to compute a single dataset node.
func generateDatasetItem(cache []uint32, index uint32, keccak512 hasher) []byte {
    // Calculate the number of theoretical rows (we use one buffer nonetheless)
    rows := uint32(len(cache) / hashWords)

    // Initialize the mix
    mix := make([]byte, hashBytes)

    binary.LittleEndian.PutUint32(mix, cache[(index%rows)*hashWords]^index)
    for i := 1; i < hashWords; i++ {
        binary.LittleEndian.PutUint32(mix[i*4:], cache[(index%rows)*hashWords+uint32(i)])
    }
    keccak512(mix, mix)

    // Convert the mix to uint32s to avoid constant bit shifting
    intMix := make([]uint32, hashWords)

>     for i := 0; i < len(intMix); i++ {
>         intMix[i] = binary.LittleEndian.Uint32(mix[i*4:])
>     }
>     // fnv it with a lot of random cache nodes based on index
>     for i := uint32(0); i < datasetParents; i++ {
>         parent := fnv0(index^i, intMix[i%16]) % rows
>         fnvHash(intMix, cache[parent*hashWords:], fnv0)
>     }
>     // Flatten the uint32 mix into a binary one and return
>     for i, val := range intMix {
>         binary.LittleEndian.PutUint32(mix[i*4:], val)
>     }
>     keccak512(mix, mix)
>     return mix
> }
> 
> // hashimoto aggregates data from the full dataset in order to produce our final
> // value for a particular header hash and nonce.
> func hashimoto(hash []byte, nonce uint64, size uint64, lookup func(index uint32) []uint32) ([]byte, []byte) {
>     // Calculate the number of theoretical rows (we use one buffer nonetheless)
>     rows := uint32(size / mixBytes)
> 
>     // Combine header+nonce into a 64 byte seed
>     seed := make([]byte, 40)
>     copy(seed, hash)
>     binary.LittleEndian.PutUint64(seed[32:], nonce)
> 
>     seed = crypto.Keccak512(seed)
>     seedHead := binary.LittleEndian.Uint32(seed)
> 
>     // Start the mix with replicated seed
>     mix := make([]uint32, mixBytes/4)
>     for i := 0; i < len(mix); i++ {
>         mix[i] = binary.LittleEndian.Uint32(seed[i%16*4:])
>     }
>     // Mix in random dataset nodes
>     temp := make([]uint32, len(mix))
> 
>     for i := 0; i < loopAccesses; i++ {
>         parent := fnvA(uint32(i)^seedHead, mix[i%len(mix)]) % rows
>         for j := uint32(0); j < mixBytes/hashBytes; j++ {
>             copy(temp[j*hashWords:], lookup(2*parent+j))
>         }
>         fnvHash(mix, temp, fnvB)
>     }
>     // Compress mix
>     for i := 0; i < len(mix); i += 4 {
>         mix[i/4] = fnvC(fnvD(fnvE(mix[i], mix[i+1]), mix[i+2]), mix[i+3])
>     }
>     mix = mix[:len(mix)/4]
> 
>     digest := make([]byte, common.HashLength)
>     for i, val := range mix {
>         binary.LittleEndian.PutUint32(digest[i*4:], val)
>     }
>     return digest, crypto.Keccak256(append(seed, digest...))
> }
> ```
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Everything in an EIP must be CC0 licensed.  This section is optional, so if you cannot get a CC0 licensed version of this code then just remove the section.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Extraneous whitespace removal.

> # Implementations
> 
> - [Go](https://github.com/mineruniter969/ethash1.1-go)
> - [C (Python/JS wrapped)](https://github.com/mineruniter969/ethash1.1-c)
> - Ethminer - TBD
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
There is no Implementations section in EIPs anymore, so this section should be removed.

# Test Vectors

> See [mineruniter969/ethash1.1-tests](https://github.com/mineruniter969/ethash1.1-tests)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{
  "first": {
    "nonce": "4242424242424242",
    "mixHash": "aa6a928db9b548ebf20fc9a74e9200321426f1c2db1571636cdd3a33eb162b36",
    "header": "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",
    "seed": "0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000",
    "result": "3972318778d2af9d3c5c3dfc463bc2a5ebeebd1a7a04392708ff94d29aa18c5f",
    "cache_size": 16776896,
    "full_size": 1073739904,
    "header_hash": "2a8de2adf89af77358250bf908bf04ba94a6e8c3ba87775564a41d269a05e4ce",
    "cache_hash": "35ded12eecf2ce2e8da2e15c06d463aae9b84cb2530a00b932e4bbc484cde353"
  },
  "second": {
    "nonce": "307692cf71b12f6d",
    "mixHash": "4a2ef8287dc21f5def0d4e9694208c56e574b1692d7b254822a3f4704d8ad1ba",
    "header": "f901f7a01bef91439a3e070a6586851c11e6fd79bbbea074b2b836727b8e75c7d4a6b698a01dcc4de8dec75d7aab85b567b6ccd41ad312451b948a7413f0a142fd40d4934794ea3cb5f94fa2ddd52ec6dd6eb75cf824f4058ca1a00c6e51346be0670ce63ac5f05324e27d20b180146269c5aab844d09a2b108c64a056e81f171bcc55a6ff8345e692c0f86e5b48e01b996cadc001622fb5e363b421a056e81f171bcc55a6ff8345e692c0f86e5b48e01b996cadc001622fb5e363b421b90100000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000008302004002832fefd880845511ed2a80a0e55d02c555a7969361cf74a9ec6211d8c14e4517930a00442f171bdb1698d17588307692cf71b12f6d",
    "seed": "0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000",
    "result": "5ab98957ba5520d4e367080f442e37a047cfd9d2857b6e00dd12d82900d108a6",
    "cache_size": 16776896,
    "full_size": 1073739904,
    "header_hash": "100cbec5e5ef82991290d0d93d758f19082e71f234cf479192a8b94df6da6bfe",
    "cache_hash": "35ded12eecf2ce2e8da2e15c06d463aae9b84cb2530a00b932e4bbc484cde353"
  }
}
```
Test vectors should either be inlined into the EIP or included as a file in `../assets/eip-3372/<filename>`.  It looks like the test vectors are pretty small, so I recommend just inlining them here.
